You change the shape of yourself or a willing creature into a completely new form.

When you shapeshift a target, you choose a form granted by a (genotype) talent you possess, as well as a series of traits for them. Forms constitute a creature’s basic physical makeup (humanoid, draconic, animalistic, avian, etc.) while traits are special characteristics or alterations (natural weapons, creature size, special abilities, etc.).

The target’s current physical makeup changes completely into that of the new form, its appearance changes into something of your choice that matches its new shape (although your control is not fine enough to mimic a specific individual creature), and it loses any special abilities, natural weapons, speaking ability, or movement types that were dependent on the old form, gaining new ones in their place. Unless their new form prevents the target from supplying the necessary components of their magic, such as hands for Somatic Casting or speech for Verbal Casting, shapeshifted targets do not lose their ability to use magic sphere talents or abilities unless stated otherwise.

In addition to the benefits listed in the (genotype) talent, you can grant the target 1 trait, plus an additional trait at 5th level (two traits), 11th level (three traits), and 17th level (four traits). You cannot grant the same trait more than once unless the trait indicates it may be granted multiple times.

A target may only be affected by one shapeshift at any one time. If a caster attempts to place a second shapeshift on a target, he must succeed at a spellcasting ability check against the spell save DC or sphere DC of the caster of the existing effect. If he succeeds, the second shapeshift is successfully placed on the target, suppressing the first (which continues to expend its duration even while suppressed). The Transformation feat, the wild shape ability of the druid class, spells like alter self, animal shapes, polymorph, and shapechange, and other similar powers all count as a shapeshift for this purpose, although alternate sources of specific physical traits (for example, a class feature that lets you grow claws) still function.

The target chooses whether it’s equipment falls to the ground in it’s space, merges into its new form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal, but the GM decides whether it is practical for the new form to wear a piece of equipment, based on the creature’s form and size. The equipment doesn’t change size or shape to match the new form, and any equipment that the new form can’t wear must either fall to the ground or merge with it. Equipment that merges with the form has no effect until the shapeshift ends.

If a talent or trait has a listed AC, this AC does not stack with any worn armor unless noted; use the higher value. Shields may be applied normally, though not all forms have the limbs required to wield them.

Natural Weapons: Some traits grant natural weapons, such as bites, claws, spines, talons, etc. These abilities alter the target’s unarmed strike, letting them change the damage die and damage type. Some might also grant special abilities that further augment their use. Some natural weapons require the target to have a particular set of limbs; a creature without the required limb cannot gain the natural weapons, and cannot put two natural weapons on the same limb (for example, if you have one head, you could only gain one bite weapon).